Sentence
The Deadliest Plane Crash
PBS Airdate: October 17, 2006
Blinded by thick fog, two fully loaded 747s race towards disaster.
Get off! Get off! Get off!
In 1977, the worst accident in aviation history killed nearly 600 people.
It was a survival mode that kicked in, and it was just, "get out of that airplane."
And we're now...
We're going...
Blamed on pilot error in low visibility, the accident was a wake up call.
I think every airline pilot knew there was something here that probably had made this an accident waiting to happen.
But now, 30 years later, near misses on runways continue to occur.
Technology exists to warn controllers and pilots of impending collisions, but only a few airports have it.
The government's top safety bureau warns that it may only be a matter of time before a major collision happens.
We've been operating on luck.
We can't continue to do that. Safety is not a lucky system; it's a system of science, analysis and fact.
Are we doomed to repeat history?
Standby for takeoff.
I will call you.
We're still taxiing down the runway.
What will it take to make our runways safer?
There are lessons to be learned from The Deadliest Plane Crash, up next on NOVA.
Close to the shores of Africa, surrounded by warm seas, are seven volcanic islands called the Canaries.
This Spanish territory is one of the world's most popular tourist destinations.
On March 27th, 1977, a KLM 747 prepares to depart from the Canary island, Tenerife.
Ready for start up, in sequence, one, two, three, four.
Affirmative, we're ready on one.
The huge jumbo jet taxis into position. At the same time, a thick fog gathers on the runway, cutting visibility.
The pilot, Jacob Van Zanten, has logged more than 11,000 hours in the cockpit.
But, despite his years of experience, he makes a terrible mistake, one that will baffle experts for decades to come. He begins his takeoff without clearance from the tower.
What he doesn't realize is that another plane, a Pan Am 747, is taxiing on the same runway.
That son of a bitch is coming straight at us!
Damn! Come on! Please!
Get off! Get off!
The crash and fire, on the runway at Tenerife, killed 583 people, making it the worst aviation accident in history.
The handful who survived recall a harrowing ordeal.
We had 28 people in the upstairs lounge; the lounge was no longer on the airplane.
I looked in the cabin, and everything was on fire.
I thought, "Oh my god, we're trapped."
Joan was standing there yelling, "Suzanne, take my hand."
It was a survival mode that kicked in, and I was just, like, "Get out of that airplane."
I said, "I will jump and try and break your fall."
I felt so responsible, because I couldn't take care of my passengers, and so helpless...and looking back and knowing that there is nothing you can do.
You can't get back in the aircraft. There's no way to get in it, and it's all on fire.
As the news spreads around the world, everyone wants to know: "How could such a devastating accident occur? And why would such a seasoned pilot violate such a basic rule of aviation?"
I can't emphasize to you, enough, how incredibly seismic this accident was.
This was the granddaddy—not only of accidents, in terms of numbers of deaths and the fact that it was two 747s—this was so horrific, involving the best and the brightest of pilots.
We had to get inside the pilot's mind; we had to know what happened.
The story of the worst accident in aviation history begins about 4 hours before the crash.
Two 747s are approaching Gando Airport on Grand Canary Island, a KLM flight from the Netherlands, and a Pan Am flight out of Los Angeles.
The American plane made a stop in New York where it picked up a fresh crew.
The cabin is nearly full, with 378 passengers and 13 flight attendants to look after them.
I was on the flight with my best friend, Suzanne Donovan.
And we used to bid flights together.
We could do that, because we enjoyed each other's company so much.
Onboard the Dutch plane: 234 passengers and 14 crew, commanded by KLM's chief pilot, Captain Jacob Van Zanten.
Jacob Van Zanten was the type of senior captain that all of us, as airline pilots, eventually wanted to be.
I mean, this was the top of the food chain.
This was the guy who was not only a family man—well respected, well loved—at KLM he was at the top of the management chain as a pilot.
He was the head of safety; he was an individual who everybody at that airline looked up to.
This was a fellow whose face was on most of the advertising about KLM all over the world.
I mean this was the best and the brightest.
Van Zanten spends most of his time training other pilots, including the man in the next seat, Klaas Meurs.
In fact, it was Van Zanten who issued Meurs his 747 certification.
Of the 234 Dutch passengers, many are vacationing families, 52 children among them.
Three are not tourists, but rather tour guides who live in the Canaries and are now returning to their homes.
I lived in Puerto de la Cruz. That's a small village northwest of Tenerife.
Yvonne was traveling with me.
Walter was traveling with us.
It was a very nice atmosphere on board, a very relaxed atmosphere.
As the two planes near Las Palmas, a drama begins to unfold at Gando Airport, when an anonymous caller warns that a bomb has been placed in the terminal.
Though the Canaries lie off the coast of Africa, they are Spanish territory.
The bomb threat was the work of separatists waging a violent campaign for independence.
As luck would have it, the terrorists chose this moment to act.
Leave all of your belongings behind and exit immediately.
All passengers must leave the terminal immediately.
Attention all passengers, leave all of your belongings and exit immediately.
All passengers must...
A few minutes after the call, a bomb explodes at Gando Airport.
Gando, KLM 4805 is with you now. KLM 4805, Gando.
The airport is closed.
The tower at Gando radios the KLM pilot that the airport is closed.
All planes are diverted to Los Rodeos airport, on nearby Tenerife Island.
This diversion could prove to be a significant problem.
The KLM crew is scheduled to return to Amsterdam later that day; a long delay at Tenerife could put them past their duty time limits.
Pilots are limited as to the amount that they can work in any given day.
After that there's a required rest period.
This is done to combat fatigue and to help reduce the likelihood of errors.
In the KLM case, they were beginning to push that limit.
And that is always a concern, because if you can't complete the flight, now you have to overnight yourself and, unexpectedly, all of your passengers, in a remote location that may or may not actually be able to accommodate them.
Gando, Pan Am 1736. Good afternoon.
Pan Am 1736, Gando. The airport is closed.
The tower diverts the Pan Am plane as well.
The first officer requests permission to remain in a holding pattern until the airport has reopened, but the request is denied.
Negative, sir.
I say again, the airport is closed.
I think they just had so much traffic to deal with they didn't have time to even consider giving an airplane clearance to hold or whatever.
So that's, that's what I assumed, that they had made up their mind that they were just diverting everyone to Tenerife.
So, now, both jumbo jets find themselves heading for the smaller Los Rodeos Airport, on the island of Tenerife, half an hour away.
It has only one runway, but it's the closest alternative.
Tenerife was a commercial airport, but it was a smaller airport.
It was perfectly okay to bring a 747 in there, on a diversion, but not a whole fleet of airplanes, as happened on that day.
The problem was there weren't enough places to park them; there weren't enough people on fuel trucks; there wasn't enough in the way of facilities to handle this influx of passengers.
And it was frustrating for every one of the aircrews involved.
Ladies and gentlemen this is Captain...
Captain Victor Grubbs breaks the news to the weary passengers, who've been traveling for more than 12 hours already.
When they made the announcement that we were not going to be able to land, right then, at Las Palmas, mostly I was frustrated because it had been a really long trip, and I was tired, and time changes and this and that, so I guess I would say the chief feeling was frustration and sadness that we couldn't immediately disembark.
People were not happy about this because it was not a good omen, you know.
It was not a good omen having this take place.
For the air traffic controllers at Los Rodeos, it's bad news as well.
It's Sunday.
Only two controllers are on duty, and they're not accustomed to handling this much traffic.
KLM 4805, you are number three behind the 737.
Report outer marker.
4805. Follow the 737, report outer marker, Los Rodeos grounds. KLM 4805.
After landing, the KLM pilot allows the passengers to deplane to wait out the delay.
Soon, the small terminal becomes overwhelmed by the influx of unexpected visitors, and now the Pan Am plane, ferrying hundreds more, arrives.
The ground situation was a traffic jam, because, when we landed there, the ramp was so crowded with other airplanes, and we were directed to taxi down to the end of the ramp area and park behind three other airplanes.
Every new plane that arrives takes up more of the limited parking space. Soon, all the taxiways are blocked.
The controllers discuss how best to maneuver the planes when it comes time to take off.
Their plan calls for the two jumbo jets to drive onto the runway, taxi to the opposite end, turn around and go.
It's a slow and cumbersome procedure, but they have no choice.
Back taxiing is done all the time in aviation.
There is nothing particularly unsafe, difficult or strange about it.
Where there are taxiway problems, and you need to use the runway to position an airplane, that's the normal way to do it.
While they plan, a new problem develops.
The weather begins to deteriorate, clouds roll in.
I'm worried we're going to get caught by this fog.
All we need now is for them...
The KLM pilot worries that if they remain on the ground too long, they will have to go off duty, stranding everyone for the night.
Meanwhile, back in the terminal, the tour guide, Robina, has decided to stay on Tenerife, which is where her boyfriend lives.
She tries in vain to persuade her friends to stay with her.
They were making plans. You know, "We're going to have dinner here, and then we're going to have a drink there."
And I just wanted to go back to him.
In the end, it's love that saves Robina.
I met Robina in December, 1976.
I fell in love, and we've never been...
...separated.
No, not again, afterwards.
With all diverted aircraft now on the ground, the tower crew suddenly has little to do except worry about the weather and listen to a soccer match to pass the time...
Rodeos, Rodeos, Gando.
Rodeos, Go ahead.
Gando to Tenerife A.T.C., we've just reopened.
...until word comes that Gando airport has reopened.
And, at last, everyone can leave.
Ladies and gentlemen, may I have your attention, please?
Gando Airport has reopened.
Your flights will be re-boarding shortly.
Please make your way back to the gate as quickly as possible when your flight is called.
Thank you for your attention.
Boarding was very complicated, because, when the passengers were called for their flights, they were scattered throughout the airport, in the cafeteria or buying souvenirs.
We had to go round them up, and, in fact, some passengers never did board the aircraft.
While the KLM waits for its passengers to re-board the crew decides to refuel.
This seemingly routine decision will have catastrophic consequences.
As you add fuel to an airplane, even the size of a 747, you increase the amount of speed necessary for what we call "V1 and rotate," in other words to lift it off the runway.
You increase the landing and takeoff distance by a certain amount.
These are all very calculated figures, and, of course, you look at that before you make the decision, as a captain, on whether or not to refuel at a particular location.
In order to keep the weight down at takeoff, the normal practice is to take on only the amount of fuel required.
But the Dutch captain takes on 55 tons, enough to get him not just to Las Palmas, but all the way back to Amsterdam.
KLM 4805.
Inside the terminal, all the passengers are called to rejoin their flights.
Meanwhile, Robina says goodbye to her friends.
They wanted me to go with them.
And they really tried to persuade me, and I tried to persuade them to stay.
And, yeah, but that's, that's how it goes.
The temperature is 14 and falling.
The controllers are now racing against the worsening weather.
But some planes can't move.
The Pan Am Plane is stuck behind the KLM which is still refueling.
1736 there is a delay for you.
The KLM in front of you is refueling.
So the first and second officers decide to go outside to see if there's room to taxi around the other jet.
The engineer and I went out underneath the right wing and, basically, stepped off the distance between our wingtip and the KLM 747's wingtip, and we were 12 feet short of being able to taxi easily around the airplane.
For the KLM, another delay.
Two children have wandered off, and the parents have gone to look for them.
The flight attendants ask the runway coordinator to find the missing family.
When he locates them, he takes them back to the plane, but time has been lost and the weather is getting worse.
I'll never forget that.
If I hadn't found them, they'd be alive today.
Fortunately for Robina, she wasn't missed by the KLM crew.
Station calling to start...
Ground, KLM 4805 is ready for start up.
4805, clear to start.
The KLM pilots start their engines one by one and prepare to go back out onto the runway for takeoff.
But the fog is closing in.
As the clouds roll over the runway, visibility drops from 10 kilometers down to three, in just a few minutes.
Approach, 4805 requires backtrack on runway one-two for takeoff on three-zero.
Taxi straight ahead to end of runway and make a backtrack.
Roger. Make a backtrack. 4805 is now on the runway.
Pan Am 1736 ready to start.
Pan Am 1736 clear to taxi on runway, following the KLM.
Pan Am 1736 following KLM.
Basically, our instructions were to follow KLM, to backtrack down the runway.
Now, backtrack means that you're taxiing down the runway in the opposite direction of the takeoff, following KLM.
The second 747, weighing 335 tons, turns onto the runway and creeps along at about 10 miles per hour. The two aircraft are on the same runway.
The visibility is fluctuating, but it's still very poor.
And we saw the fog bank come off of the right hill, and proceed down and stop right on the runway.
So our visibility went from unlimited to 500 meters.
We lost sight of the KLM airplane.
The American pilots are nervous.
They can't see the KLM plane, and that means that the KLM can't see them, even when it turns around.
The Pan Am has to turn off the runway.
But where?
It's from this moment that we know, from the voice and data recorders in both planes and from the tower recorder, exactly what transpired.
The tower now confirms that visibility has dropped to 500 meters.
There are several things you're worried about immediately, as the visibility drops.
Remember, your eye to runway height is over 40 feet in a 747, and you can have a fog so thick you can't even see the runway right in front of you.
Secondly, you're worrying about, when you get to the end of the runway, you're going to have legal visibility for takeoff.
Look at it out there.
I mean this cloud just rolled right onto us.
I don't think anybody has the minimums now.
We turned our chart over and it said, "RVR minimum 700 meters visibility."
So we assumed that with him just giving us 500 meters, we couldn't take off.
Pan Am 1736.
Pan Am 1736, approach.
Uh, we were also instructed to taxi down the runway, is that correct?
Affirmative.
Taxi to the runway.
Leave the runway third, third to your left.
Third to the left, okay.
Third he said?
Three.
Third. Third to your left.
I thought he said first.
Leave the runway third to your left, third to your left.
Left turn.
Unfamiliar with the airport, the Pan Am pilots search for their turnoff.
Their confusion arises from the fact that the third exit, Charlie 3, requires making a very sharp turn which would point them in the wrong direction down the taxiway.
To reach the end of the runway, the next exit, Charlie 4, with a 45 degree angle, seems to make better sense.
Would you confirm that you want Pan Am 1736 to turn left at the third intersection?
The third one, sir: one, two, three. Third, third one.
One, two.
Good, that's what we need right, the third one?
Uno, dos, tres.
Right.
Pan Am was told to take the third taxiway.
Well, "Third from what?" became the question.
Was he counting the taxi where they had come out of?
Which taxiway was the first one in the count? There were several turnoffs in the runway, one of which was very hard to make, because it was such an extreme angle.
1736 report runway clear.
Pan Am 1736.
We couldn't see any taxiways.
We couldn't see...barely, the centerline of the runway we were taxiing on, but we knew that the 45-degree angle to the left was the taxiway to take.
Meanwhile, the KLM, half a mile ahead and hidden in the fog, nears the end of the runway.
Back in the tower, things are becoming tense.
For several minutes, they've been unable to see either jumbo jet on the runway.
Your different airplanes that you're controlling are going to report to you precisely what they're doing and where they are; this is the theory.
That controller has to maintain a clear mental lock on where these individuals are, these airplanes, at all times.
Pan Am 1736, approach. Position please.
1736, just checking that.
Yeah, that's the 45.
The tower asks the Pan Am plane to report its position, and it's clear from the transcript that the crew still cannot find the turnoff.
It goes ahead.
I think it will take us to the taxiway.
Maybe he counts these as three.
Oh, I like this.
The visibility goes up and down by the minute.
In the KLM, Captain Van Zanten is worried that the airport will close.
There's a good chance he's going to be trapped on the ground, forced to spend the night at Los Rodeos—not an enticing prospect.
Here's what Jacob would have been thinking about: "If I have to shut the operation down and give my guys 12 hours of rest, and myself, I'm going to have to buy outbound rooms, rather, for the passengers, that's for one day.
That's going to be a huge expense.
I'm going to have a 747 sitting on the ramp, where it shouldn't be, and one less bird to fly the next scheduled trips out of Amsterdam.
That's going to cost us a little bit of time and money." But the most important thing, and this is true, is the embarrassment of a senior leader and being unable to make happen what he wanted to have happen.