Three, two, one, down
We're here today to announce the largest acquisition program in the history of the Department of Defense
Roger, copy that
Just for the record, pilot, yeah? You are my hero.
In the skies over the Mojave Desert a battle of X-planes has begun.
That looks good.
Over the next year, two different planes will take to the skies again and again on a relentless quest to be crowned the fighter of the future, perhaps the last manned fighter the U.S. will ever build.
It smoothes out beautifully.
Woohoo! This is fun.
God, it looked so awesome.
It felt great.
We're going to fly the shit out of this airplane and just kick ass every day. That's what it's all about.
It's all part of a top-secret competition, locking two of America's aerospace giants in a furious engineering dogfight to the death.
You couldn't have a more interesting competition—two very different companies, two very different designs, conservative heavyweight against a radical newcomer.
We've got a hell of a smart team, so lets go figure out how to make it work.
There's never any real time to relax.
Would I like to be farther ahead? Yes. Would I like to be further done? Yes.
I think we truly believe we've got the right vehicle for the customer.
It's starting to look like an airplane, that's what really neat about it.
I see our future contract.
Well, that, too.
Not just any contract, but the most lucrative contract in military history, at least 200 billion dollars.
And we're flying.
And the winner won't be just any fighter.
It will need to land on a carrier, evade enemy radar, hover like a helicopter.
But trying to build a fighter that can do all three, it's a tremendous challenge.
Come on, Simon.
Experimental new designs come with their share of risks and failures.
But now the U.S. military desperately wants a winner, claiming that aging fighters and shrinking budgets threaten to undermine its command of the skies.
Will a one-size-fits-all fighter, a Joint Strike Fighter, work for the Air Force, the Navy, the Marines?
Will it rescue them from the death spiral of defense costs?
With unprecedented access from the Department of Defense, NOVA's cameras take you into the U.S. military's most classified facilities from the beginning through repeated trial and error.
Talk to me.
Do you want me to reset or slow?
We're recommending we abort.
The original design wasn't going to hack it.
How much effort is ahead of us to make it work?
Watch two teams struggle to get their daring ideas off the drawing board and into the air.
The Joint Strike Fighter will be the world's premiere strike platform.
With the decision to proceed now made, it is now appropriate to announce the winner of the Joint Strike Fighter competition.
In the end, only one winner takes all—in The Battle of the X-Planes, up next on NOVA.
Major funding for NOVA is provided by the Park Foundation, dedicated to education and quality television.
it's given us the framework to help make wireless communications clear.
 Sprint is proud to support NOVA.
And by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and by contributions to your PBS station from viewers like you. Thank you.
Inside this bag is the future of American fighter power.
There will probably never, ever be another program as complex as this, or as big as this when you start talking about dollars.
It's called the Joint Strike Fighter Program.
For five years the JSF has held a competition between two titans of aerospace to see who will build the next generation fighter.
It's a prize worth up to 200 billion dollars, and the winner's name is in the bag.
The winner of the JSF competition is going to dominate the fighter aircraft market, not only here in the United States, but worldwide.
Fasten your seatbelt and put up your tray table.
NOVA and the Department of Defense have cleared you to enter places where cameras have never gone before, from secret installations to the cockpits of the latest experimental fighters.
You've landed in the classified world of the X-planes—both hi-tech and handcrafted—where pilots fly into the unknown with just you by their side.
This is the battle to build the fighter of the 21st century.
In the first strike in the war on terror, fighters are the front-line warriors.
Navy fighters join squadrons from the Air Force and the Marines to attack Taliban and Al Qaeda positions in Afghanistan.
These aircraft play a key role in routing the enemy just as they did in the Gulf War in the early 1990s.
In fact, some of the fighters are literally the same planes built in the '80s, designed in the '70s to fulfill Cold War objectives from the '60s.
The most important weapon in America's arsenal is based on ideas almost a half-century old.
Our airplanes, they're wearing out. They're tired.
Thirty year airplane's still a great airplane, serves its purposes well, but it's, it's old.
These aircraft, in the future battlefield they're going to be a bit like dinosaurs, not just in their sort of physical age, but their electronic capability.
They may not be survivable.
We now have to go to higher altitude instead of lower altitude.
We need to make ourselves as small as possible from a radar perspective.
We have to do the same job, but the world has changed.
Almost all of America's fighters will one day wind up here at the boneyard at Davis-Monthan Air Force Base in Arizona.
Old generals may fade away, but old fighters are cannibalized for parts.
The Air Force still relies on thousands of these, the venerable F-16, but the F-16 is past its prime.
In the age of stealth, this fighter shows up on radar the size of a small flying house.
This is an F-18, the mainstay of the Navy, but Navy planes get old fast.
The controlled crash known as a carrier landing and the rapid acceleration of a catapult launch will eventually create irreparable stress fractures and send them all here.
This is the subsonic AV-8 Harrier Jump Jet, flown by the Marines.
While it remains the only successful vertical landing fighter, it dates back to the British invasion of America by the Beatles.
Though later refined by McDonnell Douglas, by any measure the Harrier is ready for retirement.
The goal of the Joint Strike Fighter program is to replace all of these, the F-16, the F-18 and even the vertically landing Harrier.
It is an absolute vital necessity to have, not only a replacement airplane for the older airplanes, but to have an airplane that is a 21st century airplane to meet the needs for tomorrow.
The plane for the 21st century, at least for the Air Force, would appear to be already here: the new F-22 Raptor, scheduled for deployment in 2005.
The Raptor is the ultimate fighter, so stealthy its radar signature isn't much bigger than a bird.
And it can fly at supersonic speeds longer than any other fighter, and that means it can strike deeply and invisibly at an opponent.
But the Raptor has a huge vulnerability that the JSF program must overcome: a giant price tag. Each plane costs about 100 million dollars.
The F-22 is a spectacular airplane.
The problem is it's expensive.
And that means the Air Force will never really have enough of them to attack the many and varied small and large targets that make up the modern battlefield.
The F-22 is just the latest example of a trend that goes back decades.
Each new generation of fighters costs more than the last, so fewer are purchased—ever more expensive fighters in ever decreasing numbers.
In defense circles, that's known as the death spiral.
Where the death spiral could lead is the prediction that in the year 2054, the U.S. defense budget will only buy one airplane.
So the Air Force uses the airplane in the morning, the Navy uses it in the evening, and the Marines, unfortunately, only get to use it every leap year on the extra day.
So that is the JSF's mission impossible—to break the death spiral by coming up with a new fighter that costs a third of an F-22, replaces all of these, and meets the needs of the Air Force, the Navy and the Marines.
They absolutely said, "You'll never pull this off—impossible."
In the past, the fiercely independent services would have fought for their own weapons programs.
In the sixties, when the cost-cutting Secretary of Defense, Robert McNamara, forced the Navy and Air Force to use the same plane, the F-111, the joint program was a resounding flop.
But these days, with smaller post-Cold-War budgets, the spreadsheet is mightier than the sword.
The Joint Strike Fighter program was a huge leap of faith for the services.
The enabler, though, was they didn't have any choice.
They knew that they had to modernize their fighter force structure, and the funds were not available to do that.
With no other options, the effort to design the Joint Strike Fighter begins and almost immediately there's disagreement.
The services can't even agree on the number of engines.
The Navy's F-18 Hornet has two engines for safety.
If one goes out, you don't have to ditch.
But two engines are a deal-killer for the Marines because of their weight.
We cannot build, today, a two-engine, vertical short takeoff landing airplane.
So the Navy wanted two engines, the Marine Corp had to have a single engine, and the Air Force wanted a single engine, because it was much more affordable and they don't have...they're not out over the ocean at night all by themselves like we are.
The decision hinges on how dependable one engine can be.
Steady state 255 started.
After talking with jet manufacturers, the JSF team ramps up the specs for engine reliability.
Rear Admiral Steidle convinces a reluctant Navy to go with just one.
That was another piece that was necessary to pull the program together, because without that we could not have a common production line.
I think the effort that's gone on here to create a joint requirement is astounding.
And it's really...it's what's allowed the program to get where it is.
And it will be what allows the program to continue, because if the services keep saying, "We all agree what we want, and we want this aircraft," then it will happen.
Even with everyone on board, there's rough air ahead.
We know how to build a stealth fighter.
We know how to build a long-range agile fighter.
We may even have a good way of building a fighter that can land and take off vertically.
But trying to build a fighter that can do all three is very, very difficult.
The Pentagon spent over three billion dollars in research to see if it was possible, and the answer? Sort of.
The airplanes are not the same aircraft, but the building blocks are the same building blocks, for the most part: same engine, same major avionics.
In fact, it's not important to have every piece...part...the same, but the expensive parts or modules...Through the life cycle of the aircraft there was the potential to save 60 billion dollars.
And that's a lot of money in anybody's calculus, even in the Department of Defense.
With the services in agreement about the requirements, the Joint Strike Fighter program launches a competition for innovative designs for the new affordable family of fighters.
Like a high-stakes game show, only two contractors can make it to the final round and build test planes.
With billions on the line, U.S. defense contractors hold their breath as the Pentagon announces the two finalists for "Who Wants to Build the Next Generation Fighter?"
These contractors are Lockheed Martin and Boeing.
The announcement sends shockwaves through the aerospace industry, dealing a deathblow to one of the most respected names in aviation.
McDonnell Douglas, a company with a fighter legacy that seemed to guarantee a spot in the final round, doesn't make the cut.
The impact for the company and its employees is devastating.
Within two years, McDonnell Douglas is sold to Boeing, one of the JSF winners.
A world leader in commercial jets, the Seattle-based company is seen as an unlikely contender in a fighter battle, for good reason.
Boeing's last fighter was built in the 1930s—the P-26 Peashooter, a fighter from the age before jets, before even a closed cockpit.
Boeing hadn't built a fighter in a long time, and I think early on Boeing was considered, literally, a dark horse in this competition.
But the Boeing acquisition of McDonnell Douglas, the builder of the Navy's F-18 and the Marine's Harrier, makes a dark horse an even bet.
By acquiring McDonnell Douglas, Boeing suddenly moves from becoming the least experienced JSF team to possibly the most experienced.
...clearly leveled the playing field.
I'm in this job to win, and going back to...
Boeing's JSF effort is lead by Frank Statkus, an engineer and thirty-year company man.
When you shoulder the weight of a potential 200 billion-dollar contract, stress comes with the job.
A year ago I had hair, and it was dark.
And now I have less of it, and it's a race to see what goes gray versus goes away.
While Statkus runs the project, he isn't the creator of Boeing's design.
These days with the complexity of fighters, no single person can claim that role.
State-of-the-art fighters, they're all designed now by computers, and it's, and it's...these are big teams of engineers who sit down, you know, and do these CAD/CAM drawings.
It is very tough to find, you know, one person who can sit there and tell you that, "I designed that airplane."
At the heart of the Boeing design for the JSF is a large delta, or triangular wing.
It's an unusual approach, but the big advantages of that are that it's structurally simple and that it contains an enormous amount of fuel.
Though there hasn't been an American fighter built with a delta wing since the '60s, the design has its advantages.
The fastest jet ever to fly, the SR-71 Blackbird has a delta wing because it decreases drag at supersonic speeds.
The Space shuttle is also built around one because it provides great lift.
But neither the Shuttle nor the SR-71 are exactly agile.
A delta design pays a price in speed when executing turns, and the control surfaces near the tail don't have the leverage to turn the plane sharply.
European designers have overcome these handicaps in their new fighter, the Typhoon, by adding canards near the front of the plane.
But in the U.S., delta fighters have been out of favor for decades, until the JSF picked the Boeing design as a finalist.
Why the new interest?
Deltas can be cheap to build.
Boeing took a step back and said "What makes airplanes expensive?
How can we leave it out?"
And they got a very, very simple design.
Boeing's expertise in wings has kind of taken a different tack.
Our engineers have chosen to build this wing as one piece from tip to tip.
We have always studied the idea of building a one-piece wing and attaching the fuselage to the wing.
And so this time we had an opportunity to really try it.
Boeing has taken to heart the JSF concept, meeting the needs of the Air Force, Navy and Marines through a versatile common design.
And it even accommodates the biggest JSF challenge, landing like a Harrier.
While it gets a bad rap for safety, the Harrier is no doubt the most adaptable fighter ever built.
Matching its capabilities will drive many of the design decisions of the competition.
When fully loaded with fuel and bombs, a Harrier takes off in as little as 500 feet, a third of that needed by most fighters.
That short takeoff distance makes many roads into potential runways.
After an attack, it returns, a lighter fighter ready to execute its trademark Buck Rogers move.
A Harrier hovers using rotating nozzles that direct engine exhaust downward.
This mode of flight, called direct lift, demands an enormous amount of power, and it's dangerous.
Before computer control, balancing a Harrier on its own engine thrust was like trying to sit on a geyser.
Even today, its accident rate is four times that of a Navy Hornet.
But through their flexibility, Harriers have proven their value.
In fact, in the Gulf War, Harriers flew more missions than any other kind of fighter.
For the British, the Harrier remains essential.
British aircraft carriers are smaller than their American counterparts.
The Harrier's short takeoff ability overcomes the problem and creates a portable fighter force.
The Harrier has allowed the U.K., basically, to be where it couldn't be.
The Falklands is a classic example.
I mean, without the Harrier, we could not have defended the Falklands.
We couldn't have got anybody...any aircraft down there.
But the ability to put a reasonably competent combat aircraft onto a deck and get it down there, and then fight, was just the difference between success and failure.
But the Harrier can't fly supersonic, a serious limitation in a modern fighter.
In terms of its turn performance, its range and endurance, and its maximum speed, whichever metric you want to look at, it fairs unfavorably with any modern airplane.
The British search for a replacement Harrier brings them to the JSF table.
They've become full partners.
It's the first time a foreign government has been included in an American fighter development program.
Alternatives to the Harrier's direct lift system have been studied by both contractors, but Boeing has come to a surprising conclusion.
Over the years, all contractors have looked at all of these various lift methods, and the least impact to the design always has been direct lift.
The Boeing lift system is basically the modern version of the Harrier, taking the engine thrust and putting it through a pair of nozzles that direct it downwards.
The advantage that Boeing has is that you basically strap on the lift module around the engine.
So the changes are pretty minimal.
The fewer the changes between the Marine fighter and the other versions, the better the bottom line.
Boeing has made an ally of affordability.
So, I believe when we're all finished doing a flight test, we'll have proven that direct lift offers the absolute greatest affordability because of the greatest commonality.
While direct lift is affordable, other parts of the plane must pay a price.
For balance during hover, the engine must be in the middle, and that leads to a gaping inlet to feed it air.
To some, Boeing has designed a plane only its mother could love.
It's a strange looking airplane.
It's short.
It's squat.
The engine's in the front, not the back.
It has this huge air inlet in front that reminds me of a hippopotamus.
This is a fighter competition not a beauty pageant, but there is an adage in aerospace that if it looks right, it flies right, and appearance may be a deciding factor.
Appearance aside, Boeing's proposal is a cunning entry for the JSF competition.
Throwing over fighter tradition, the company delivers a radical but simple design that promises to be cheap to build.
Boeing's ready to give its aerospace opponent a flight to the finish.
When I daydream, I see it hovering; I see it taking off from airfields; I see it operating around a ship.
And sometimes I even see it shooting down the Lockheed airplane.
Only in your dreams, is the likely response of Lockheed Martin, America's largest defense contractor.
For decades, in this secret facility in California, the legendary Skunk Works, Lockheed has designed and built aircraft that have blown through the boundaries of imagination.
The Lockheed's Skunk Works' reputation is founded on its ability to put together a small team of very motivated people, get everybody else out of the way, and leave them to solve a problem that everybody else thinks can't be solved.
The whole history of this place has been, "There is nothing that we can't do, there is no project that we can't accomplish."
There's a huge amount of pride, of, "We can do anything."
By the time Lockheed earns its place in the final JSF competition, Chief Engineer Rick Rezabek and his team have already spent five years designing their fighter.
Now they must build a pair of test planes in just two.
If Lockheed wins, their work will live on for decades.
If it loses...
The stakes are horrendous on this.
This program will end up running from today out through the year 2050, long after my retirement.
The performance of this team and the decision making that goes on during these next two years are very key.
The mystique of the Skunk Works remains unrivalled in aviation.
It's the birthplace of America's first operational jet fighter, the P-80.
In the '50s and '60s, this covert design house created the ultimate spy planes for the CIA: the high flying U-2 and the high velocity SR-71 Blackbird.
Later, for the Air Force, it built the F-117 Nighthawk, the first stealth fighter.
Unveiled to the public during the Gulf War, the Nighthawk was the only U.S. aircraft to strike targets in downtown Baghdad.
The image of anti-aircraft guns aimlessly blazing away at invisible attackers is a surreal salute to its success and that of the Skunk Works.
They conducted many of their most advance programs in complete secrecy, such that nobody else in the world even had a clue what they were up to.
It's got to be very, very scary going up against those guys.
The F-117 sacrifices speed and handling for stealth.
It's been superseded by the current gold standard of American fighters, the F-22 Raptor, built by Lockheed.
While very expensive and not the all-in-one fighter for the JSF, the Raptor provides a wealth of proven design ideas, including a radical new shape for stealth.
It's no surprise the Lockheed design for the JSF inherits the Raptor's contours.
Built around one common airframe, Lockheed's proposed fighter is modified for each service.
Most visibly the Navy model has a larger wing and tail for carrier landings.
The exterior design of Lockheed's fighter holds few surprises.
The company's gone with a daring new propulsion system known as a lift fan.
On the surface, it looks like the company doesn't want to gamble.
 It's on the inside, for the Marines vertical-landing requirement, that Lockheed's bet the farm.
The lift fan has been an engineering challenge, because there has not been a lift fan built before.
In the lift fan design, the engine sits in the usual fighter position in the tail.
A drive shaft connects it to a large fan placed behind the pilot.
To hover, engine exhaust is directed downward, but the fan is also engaged, taking in air from above the plane and blowing it out below.
That creates two balanced sources of thrust, potentially a more powerful and stable arrangement than the Boeing solution.
But to accomplish this feat, the drive shaft must be spun at an incredible rate.
Think of taking the propulsion system in a Navy Destroyer, shrinking that down into a smaller package, putting it into a jet fighter airplane.
It's a technological challenge in the tradition of the Skunk Works.
If successful, the lift fan will be revolutionary, but on the drawing boards, it doesn't blow away its critics.